
Armin Lange, <B>Computer Aided Text-Reconstruction and 
Transcription: CATT-Manual</B>, with an Introduction by Hermann 
Lichtenberger and an Appendix (on "Publishing the Results") by 
Timothy Doherty. T<"u>bingen: J.C.B.Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1993. 
Pp. xii + 160. ISBN 3-16-146149-5. 

=====
NOTE: This review has been commissioned by the <J>Jewish 
Quarterly Review</J> published by the Center for Judaic Studies 
at the University of Pennsylvania. Because of the nature of the 
volume under review, which deals with a rapidly changing world, 
<J>JQR</J> has permitted electronic pre-publication release of 
this basic information to appropriate outlets such as 
<J>IoudRev</J>. Please reproduce this notice with any cross-
posting of the review. The author reserves the right to modify 
the review for final publication in the <J>JQR</J>. 

=====

<0.1>
The back cover of this slim and well illustrated volume is worth 
quoting in its entirety: "This manual presents a new way of 
reconstructing damaged manuscripts, inscriptions and early prints 
using recently developed image editing software. The method -- 
called Computer Aided Text-Reconsctuction and Transcription 
(CATT) -- has been developed on the Dead Sea Scrolls, but can be 
used for any damaged text." 

<0.2>
The CATT approach has been developed by Armin Lange, at the time 
(the Introduction is dated March 1993) an advanced graduate 
student working on a dissertation on the Dead Sea Scrolls at the 
University of Munster and an associate of its Institutum Judaicum 
Delitzschianum. Lange has used available software and hardware 
operating in a DOS (IBM compatible) computer environment, but the 
procedures he documents can be performed on any system with 
sophisticated image editing capabilities. 

<0.3>
The book deserves to be reviewed as promptly as possible, since 
it deals with a timely and important subject, but in its details 
is out of date before it has even gone to press. The techniques 
it describes remain valuable for anyone working with similar 
materials of any language or date. The exact computer equipment, 
programs, and operation instructions are largely irrelevant. It 
would in most instances be disadvantageous to attempt to 
duplicate Lange's exact system, given the technological advances 
that have appeared in the meantime and will continue to appear. 

<1.1>
Lange describes a "minimum configuration" consisting of an IBM 
(or compatible) 386 machine with 8 megabytes RAM and at least 200 
megabytes hard disk storage. The graphics board and screen are 
SVGA, with 800 x 600 resolution and 256 colors shades. His 
"medium [since many larger systems could also be devised] 
configuration" is a 486 machine with 16 m RAM and a 500 m hard 
disk. Its SVGA graphics board and screen are capable of 1024 x 
768 resolution, with 16.7 million color distinctions. Windows 3.1 
is the interface of choice, running under MS-DOS 5.0 or higher. A 
scanner with a minimum of 300 dpi and 256 grayshades is 
recommended. 

<1.2>
Several image processing programs are described in detail and 
with great clarity (including clear photographs of screens): 

FotoTouch 2.1 (based on Ansel 1.0, sold with Logitech's Scanman 
256 hand scanner);

PhotoStyler 1.1 (from Ulead, now purchased by Aldus, similar to 
Adobe's Photoshop for the Macintosh);
 
PhotoStyler 2.0 (a major update of the preceding);

Image Pals Album (included in PhotoStyler 2.0, but also 
separately available for organizing images and image excerpts);

Picture Publisher 3.1 (from Micrografx).

Concluding comments on file compression and conversion, editing 
and publishing the results round out this handbook. An index is 
also provided.

<2.1>
The primary value of this volume rests in its detailed verbal 
descriptions and photographic representations of various 
processes that can be applied to the manuscript or inscription 
(or other digitized material) under examination. A somewhat more 
technical discussion of these same matters, which in may ways 
complements Lange's work, may be found in the guest contribution 
by James Marchand to my OFFLINE 37 column (<J>Religious Studies 
News</J> 7.2, March 1992 = <J>Bulletin of the Council of 
Societies for the Study of Religion</J> 21.2, April 1992) 
entitled "The Computer as Camera and Darkroom." Whereas Marchand 
writes for those who have some minimal background in photography 
and/or computing, and thus covers the ground more thoroughly, 
especially with regard to theoretical matters, Lange takes almost 
nothing for granted. In Lange's handbook, special terminology and 
concepts are carefully explained and little is left to the 
imagination -- you can see (but only in black and white; the 
actual color images on the computer screen are even more 
impressive!) what the results are of such procedures (applied to 
part or the whole image) as: 

changing brightness, contrast, colors
highlighting, modulation of background, etc.
changing size or shape 
magnification and selection of sub-sections 
negative and mirror images
rotation (for alignment, etc.)
joining fragments
overlaying of fragments, letters, etc.
reconstructing text gaps.

<00.1>
This book ought to be examined carefully -- or even cursorily! --
by anyone interested in (or skeptical of) computer enhanced 
exploration of digitized materials in general, or of such 
fragmentary and damaged written materials as the Dead Sea Scrolls 
(from which all examples are taken) in particular. It is a very 
redundant book insofar as each of the image manipulation programs 
described will do virtually identical things for many of the 
functions. And the programs it describes will no longer be the 
most powerful (or affordable) available as time goes on. But new 
or updated software will certainly continue to perform these same 
functions, and for that reason the book will continue to be 
valuable as a basic guide to the possible -- and sometimes to the 
previously highly improbable. As Jim Marchand notes at the end of his 
abovementioned contribution, "The next generation of scholars will 
have to become not only computer literate, but also image literate." 
Lange's book is another useful step in those directions.


Robert A. Kraft 
University of Pennsylvania
College Hall Box 36
Philadelphia PA 19104-6303
kraft@ccat.sas.upenn.edu

//end//
